README.md, before:

<img src="images/BCM-HGSC-Logo.png" width=250>

---

### Table of Contents

- [Description](#description)
- [Build CNVScanner](#build-cnvscanner)
- [How To Use](#how-to-use)
- [Contact Info](#Contact-Info)

---

## Description

CNVScanner is a stand-alone tool to detect copy number variations (CNVs) in both autosomal and sex chromosomes from short-read sequencing data using multiple strategies. The coverage depth is used to determine CNV type after mitigating potential sequencing artifacts using a binning tactic. CNVScanner generates putative CNVs by applying statistical significance tests to bins and combining neighboring bins with similar coverage. Paired-end read information adds an orthogonal layer of support, enhancing the confidence and accuracy of the detected CNVs. Additionally, split reads are crucial for precisely pinpointing the breakpoints of variations, contributing to more accurate mapping and characterization.

CNVScanner has an accuracy, recall and F1 score surpassing 90% when evaluated against the NIST benchmark for deletion and tandem duplications of the HG002 dataset in high confidence regions. Moreover, our CNVScanner's proficiency extends to accurately identifying approximately two-thirds of the total CNV boundaries within 10 base pairs resolution when compared to those of the NIST benchmark truthset, with one-third correctly locating the exact boundary positions. Additionally, CNVScanner demonstrated an 87% (54/62) sensitivity when compared to published results for sample BAB3596 from Baylor Genetics (Liu, P., et al., DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.037)

CNVScanner performs  effectively on variants 1 kb and larger for a 30x genome, but this roughly scales with depth of coverage. 

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

## Build CNVScanner

See [INSTALL](INSTALL) for complete details. Please download the [release tarballs](https://github.com/phuang7008/CNVScanner/releases) of your choice and build CNVScanner using the following steps:

    wget https://github.com/phuang7008/Scandium/releases/download/CNVScanner_vXXX/CNVScanner-vXXX.tar.gz
    tar zxvf CNVScanner-vXXX.tar.gz 

    build htslib (see htslib install instruction at the htslib website)
    
    autoreconf -i
    ./configure
    make
    make install or make prefix=<your dir choice> install'

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

## How To Use

Before running CNVScanner, you need to set the path to the two CNVScanner libraries: slmseg and connector

    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=path-to/slmseg:path-to/connector:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH;

To run CNVScanner, here is an example of the run command: 

    cnvscanner -i input_bam -o output_dir -R reference -e exclude_region -V reference_version -r chromosome_list_to_be_processed -m 3 -T 12 -N sample_name -w genome_equal_window_bedfile -S minimal_CNV_length -B searching_distance_for_breakpoints -M lowmappability_bedfile -L GC_below_25%_bedfile -G GC_above_85%_bedfile

Note: The resources/ folder contains pre-built bedfiles needed to run CNVScanner on human genomes. Files are available for both hg37 and hg38 genome builds. Be sure to select the correct version to match your dataset.

- The human genome references can be downloaded from the following links:

        wget ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/GRCh38_reference_genome/GRCh38_full_analysis_set_plus_decoy_hla.fa .
        wget https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/references/GRCh37/hs37d5.fa.gz .

- the exclude_region: Ns regions; segdup >= 10,000bps; tandom repeats >= 10,000bps

- genome_equal_window_bedfile: can be generated using bedtools makewindows. For example, to create equal-sized windows with bin size 1000 for the hg37 human genome, using bedtools (tested on version v2.30.0)

        bedtools makewindows -g hg37.txt -w 1000 > hg37.1000.windows.bed

- GA4GH version 3.3 stratification files can be downloaded from the following link:

        https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ReferenceSamples/giab/release/genome-stratifications/v3.3/GRCh37@all/

- lowmappability_bedfile: needs to be sorted and merged

- GC_below_25percent_bedfile: created from combination of the following files: GRCh37_gc15_slop50.bed.gz, GRCh37_gc15to20_slop50.bed.gz, GRCh37_gc20to25_slop50.bed.gz; needs to be sorted and merged

- GC_above_85percent_bedfile: needs to be sorted and merged

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

## Contact Info

If users encounter any issues, please contact pemhuang@gmail.com

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

Commit message:

remove slmseg and connector from the top level of Makefile.am. So slmseg and connector libraries need to be build separately. Also modified the READMD.md and add -ldeflate in the src/Makefile.am for linking as Chandler added two new libraries in for R package that broke the linking

README.md, after:

<img src="images/BCM-HGSC-Logo.png" width=250>

---

### Table of Contents

- [Description](#description)
- [Build CNVScanner](#build-cnvscanner)
- [How To Use](#how-to-use)
- [Contact Info](#Contact-Info)

---

## Description

CNVScanner is a stand-alone tool to detect copy number variations (CNVs) in both autosomal and sex chromosomes from short-read sequencing data using multiple strategies. The coverage depth is used to determine CNV type after mitigating potential sequencing artifacts using a binning tactic. CNVScanner generates putative CNVs by applying statistical significance tests to bins and combining neighboring bins with similar coverage. Paired-end read information adds an orthogonal layer of support, enhancing the confidence and accuracy of the detected CNVs. Additionally, split reads are crucial for precisely pinpointing the breakpoints of variations, contributing to more accurate mapping and characterization.

CNVScanner has an accuracy, recall and F1 score surpassing 90% when evaluated against the NIST benchmark for deletion and tandem duplications of the HG002 dataset in high confidence regions. Moreover, our CNVScanner's proficiency extends to accurately identifying approximately two-thirds of the total CNV boundaries within 10 base pairs resolution when compared to those of the NIST benchmark truthset, with one-third correctly locating the exact boundary positions. Additionally, CNVScanner demonstrated an 87% (54/62) sensitivity when compared to published results for sample BAB3596 from Baylor Genetics (Liu, P., et al., DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.037)

CNVScanner performs  effectively on variants 1 kb and larger for a 30x genome, but this roughly scales with depth of coverage. 

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

## Build CNVScanner

See [INSTALL](INSTALL) for complete details. Please download the [release tarballs](https://github.com/phuang7008/CNVScanner/releases) of your choice and build CNVScanner using the following steps:

    wget https://github.com/phuang7008/Scandium/releases/download/CNVScanner_vXXX/CNVScanner-vXXX.tar.gz
    tar zxvf CNVScanner-vXXX.tar.gz 

To build htslib (please view htslib install instruction at the htslib website)

To build the 'slmseg' library
    
    cd slmseg
    make

If the compilation of 'slmseg' suite failed, please contact [slmseg authors](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-017-1734-5)

To build the 'connector' library to connect slmseg library with CNVScanner

    cd connector
    make

If the compilation of 'connector' library failed, please contact [Peter Huang](pemhuang@gmail.com)

To build 'CNVScanner' executable, go the the top directory of your CNVScanner

    autoreconf -i
    ./configure
    make
    make install or make prefix=<your dir choice> install'

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

## How To Use

Before running CNVScanner, you need to set the path to the two CNVScanner libraries: slmseg and connector

    export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=path-to/slmseg:path-to/connector:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH;

To run CNVScanner, here is an example of the run command: 

    cnvscanner -i input_bam -o output_dir -R reference -e exclude_region -V reference_version -r chromosome_list_to_be_processed -m 3 -T 12 -N sample_name -w genome_equal_window_bedfile -S minimal_CNV_length -B searching_distance_for_breakpoints -M lowmappability_bedfile -L GC_below_25%_bedfile -G GC_above_85%_bedfile

### Note
For version 1.0, there is no -B, -M, -L and -G options; and there is no need to export LD_LIBRARY_PATH

The resources/ folder contains pre-built bedfiles needed to run CNVScanner on human genomes. Files are available for both hg37 and hg38 genome builds. Be sure to select the correct version to match your dataset.

- The human genome references can be downloaded from the following links:

        wget ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/GRCh38_reference_genome/GRCh38_full_analysis_set_plus_decoy_hla.fa .
        wget https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/references/GRCh37/hs37d5.fa.gz .

- the exclude_region: Ns regions; segdup >= 10,000bps; tandom repeats >= 10,000bps

- genome_equal_window_bedfile: can be generated using bedtools makewindows. For example, to create equal-sized windows with bin size 1000 for the hg37 human genome, using bedtools (tested on version v2.30.0)

        bedtools makewindows -g hg37.txt -w 1000 > hg37.1000.windows.bed

- GA4GH version 3.3 stratification files can be downloaded from the following link:

        https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ReferenceSamples/giab/release/genome-stratifications/v3.3/GRCh37@all/

- lowmappability_bedfile: needs to be sorted and merged

- GC_below_25percent_bedfile: created from combination of the following files: GRCh37_gc15_slop50.bed.gz, GRCh37_gc15to20_slop50.bed.gz, GRCh37_gc20to25_slop50.bed.gz; needs to be sorted and merged

- GC_above_85percent_bedfile: needs to be sorted and merged

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)

## Contact Info

If users encounter any issues, please contact pemhuang@gmail.com

[Back To The Top](#Table-of-Contents)
